Practice Plans: Beginner #3 90 Minutes
BBe
Pre-Practice Notes
Practice Session
Time(Min.) Drill Points of Emphasis
3 Character Message
6 Dynamic Stretch Without Basketballs
Description: Dynamic stretching and warm-up
routine without using basketball
•Proper form •Technique
8 Form Shooting (Ch. 1)
Description: Start with demonstration of shooting
technique. Begin by working on 1 handed shooting .
•Proper form •Going Fast •Eyes Up
•Shooting foot slightly in front •Start in
athletic position
8 Red Light Green Light -Stance/Quick Stop (Ch. 4)
Description: Coming to a quick stop on balance
•Staying Low •Staying on balance •Feet
barely leave ground
8 Forward/Reverse Pivots (Ch. 5 & 6)
Description: Forward and reverse pivots
•Staying Low •Staying on balance
6 Stationary Ball Handling
Description: (approx. 30 sec. each drill) In place
ball handling drills
•Eyes up •Going fast (mistakes are ok)
7 Passing: Chest,Bounce, Overhead
Description: Spend 90 seconds each stationary
passing drills
•Passing on a line •Passing accurately
6 Layups: 0 Dribbles & 1 Dribble(Ch. 1 & 2)
Description: Lay up finishing techniques from both
right and left sides using 0 dribbles and 1 dribble
from 1st hash mark
•Ripping ball to the ear •Using
backboard •Proper footwork
6 Game Shots
Description: Shooting jump shots from 7’-10’ after
dribbling to perimeter and pivoting
•Quick stop •Shooting foot slightly in
front •Dribble out fast
6 Defensive Stance and Stance Mirror Drill
Description: Demonstrating proper defensive stance
and taking players through stance mirror drill as a
large group
•Staying low in athletic stance •Proper
balance
Practice Plans: Beginner #3 90 Minutes
Time(Min.) Drill Points of Emphasis
8 V-Cuts and Fill Cuts
Description: Player practice getting open with
V-Cuts and Fill Cuts
•Cutting/filling fast •Change speed on
V-Cut •Target hand
10 Offense 2v0 - 2v2
Description: Work on passing and cutting with and
without a defense. Start by demonstrating how to
•Getting open •Showing target hand
•Facing up to the basket
5 Partner Speed Dribble (no video)
Description: Partner players up and give them 1
basketball. Have the 1st player speed dribble to the
other end of the court and speed dribble back -
then the partner goes - first team back wins
(change rules each race ie left hand, right hand,
alternate, etc)
•Eyes up •Controlling the basketball
3 Close Practice- Reminders
Post-Practice Comments