.
1
Copyright Notice
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical. Any unauthorized use, sharing,
reproduction, or distribution is strictly prohibited.
© Copyright 2020 Breakthrough Basketball LLC
Limits/Disclaimer Warranty
The authors and publishers of this book and the accompanying materials have used their
best efforts in preparing this book. The authors and publishers make no representation or
warranties with respect to the accuracy, applicability, fitness, or completeness of the
contents of this book. They disclaim any warranties (expressed or implied), merchantability,
or fitness for any particular purpose. The authors and publishers shall in no event be liable
for any loss or damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or
other damages. This manual contains material protected under international and Federal
Copyright Laws and Treaties. Any unauthorized reprint or use of this material is prohibited.
2
Breakthrough Basketball
Copyright Notice 2
Limits/Disclaimer Warranty 2
Introduction: About Jim Huber 5
Chapter One: Introduction 6
Basic Philosophy 6
Chapter Two: Ball Handling 7
How to use Dribbling 7
How to Dribble Properly 7
Ball Handling Progression 8
Where to Begin? 8
Stationary Ball Handling 8
Stationary Ball Handling Drills: One Ball (Basic) 9
Stationary Ball Handling Drills: One Ball (Intermediate/Challenging) 10
Moving Ball Handling Drills: One Ball 12
Stationary Ball Handling Drills: Two Balls 13
Moving Ball Handling Drills: Two Balls 15
Control Dribble Ball Handling Drills: One Ball 16
Speed Dribble Ball Handling Drills 18
Changing Speed Ball Handling Drills 20
Changing Direction Ball Handling Drills 21
Cone Ball Handling Drills 24
Beating Pressure Stationary Ball Handling Drills 27
Chapter Three : Passing 30
Keys to Passing 30
Keys to Receiving a Pass 30
Stationary Passing 30
On the Move Passing 34
Chapter Four: Finishing Moves 38
Why focus on finishing moves? 38
Keys to Finishing 38
Drills 38
Chapter Five: Shooting 42
Shooting Technique (BEEF) 42
Shooting Drills 43
Form Shooting 45
Shooting Drills 46
3
Breakthrough Basketball
Chapter Six: Rebounding 49
Rebounding Technique 49
Rebounding Tips 49
Rebounding Drills 50
Chapter Seven: Offensive Concepts 55
Offensive Concepts Tip 55
Offensive Concepts 1 v 0 55
Chapter Seven: Closing Remarks 60
Why is Skill Development Important? 60
When Should Skill Development be Taught? 60
4
Breakthrough Basketball
Introduction: About Jim Huber
Jim Huber is currently the Director of Coach
Development and a Camp Director at
Breakthrough Basketball.
Jim has developed and coached NBA players as
well as elite prospects who have attended the
nation's top college basketball programs, including
Duke and Kentucky.
Featuring 20+ years of basketball coaching
experience at the youth, high school, and college
levels, Jim's resume includes 45 championships, 13
runner-up finishes, and 26 final four appearances at regional and national tournaments.
He served as the head coach for Mokan Basketball, a Nike sponsored team. Mokan reached
the Final Four at the 2012 Peach Jam, which was made up of the top 24 teams from the
Nike Elite Youth Basketball League.
In 2013, Jim coached his team to a 1st place finish at the 2013 Nike Global Challenge.
5
Breakthrough Basketball
Chapter One: Introduction
Basic Philosophy
Start with the basics
● Start slow
● Have them get a rhythm
● Individual drills
● Progress to going fast enough to make mistakes
Advance to harder elements of the skill set
● Isolate the specific skill set in a drill
● Adding a defender
● Make it more game like
● Eventually combine certain skills in a drill to maximize practice time
6
Breakthrough Basketball
Chapter Two: Ball Handling
How to use Dribbling
● Kids dribble too much.
● Pass the ball up the court if possible.
● Be efficient with their dribble; fewer dribbles are better.
● Use the dribble to get out of trouble.
● Use the dribble to attack the rim or create shots for their teammates.
How to Dribble Properly
● Dribble the ball hard.
○ Smash the ball to the floor.
○ Snap your elbow down.
○ The quicker the ball gets to your hand, the quicker you can be in your
movements.
○ It will give the dribbler more ball security.
● Must have vision.
○ Keep your eyes up and see the entire court.
○ Look through the net or the rim.
○ See if there is an offensive advantage.
● Be on balance.
○ Have an athletic stance.
○ Keep the head up and back.
○ Keep the head centered.
● Off hand must be active.
○ Use this hand to help hold a defender.
○ Helps to create space.
● Keep the dribble alive.
○ Pick up the dribble only when you have a pass or shot attempt.
○ Picking up the dribble brings pressure that can cause bad decisions.
7
Breakthrough Basketball
Ball Handling Progression
● Get the kids a feel for the ball.
○ Dribbling on their fingertips, not their palms.
○ Stationary dribbling with 1 or 2 balls.
○ Straight line up the court dribbling.
● Teach dribbling forward and backward.
○ Dribbling backward can alleviate pressure.
● Speed dribble up the court.
○ Use both hands.
○ Be efficient with the dribble, pushing the ball ahead.
○ Change the pace dribbling up the court.
● Change Directions
○ Beat opponents who are chest to chest with the ball.
○ Develop a “go to” move and a counter move
● Release pressure from a trap
Where to Begin?
● Figure out where your players are at first.
○ Start there and progress with them.
○ There are many drills, so don’t get overwhelmed.
○ The basic fundamentals are very simple and can be repetitive.
■ Using a variety of drills can help keep players interested.
○ Be patient and have a long term approach.
Stationary Ball Handling
● Start in an athletic stance.
○ Hips apart
○ Knees bent
○ Butt down
○ Head up
○ Back up
8
Breakthrough Basketball
● Start slow and get in rhythm.
● Build speed and go fast enough to make a mistake.
○ If they stay in their comfort zone, they will not improve.
● Smash the ball and keep the eyes up.
Stationary Ball Handling Drills: One Ball (Basic)
● Ball Pounds
○ Bend the knees and stay low.
○ Keep arm bar out.
○ Dribble the ball at knee level for about 10 seconds.
○ Dribble the ball at waist level for about 5 seconds.
○ Dribble the ball at shoulder level for about 5 seconds
○ Repeat several times.
○ Repeat using the opposite hand.
○ Repeatedly remind them to stay in an athletic stance.
● Ball Pounds Opposite Side
○ Using the right hand, dribble at knee height outside the left knee for 10
seconds.
○ Switch to using the left hand dribbling at knee height outside the right knee
for 10 seconds.
○ Continue this pattern several times.
○ Make sure the off hand stays active.
● Popcorn
○ Dribble with your right hand hitting different spots on the floor at different
heights for 10 seconds.
○ Switch and repeat movements with the left hand.
● Side to Side
○ Dribble with the right hand side to side going from one foot to the other.
○ Dribble with the left hand side to side going from one foot to the other.
○ Make sure the off hand stays active.
○ Start slow and go faster and faster not being afraid to make a mistake.
9
Breakthrough Basketball
● Push/Pull
○ With the right hand, push the ball back and pull the ball forward on the right
side of the body.
○ With the left hand, push the ball back and pull the ball forward on the right
side of the body.
○ Start slower and go quicker and quicker.
Stationary Ball Handling Drills: One Ball (Intermediate/Challenging)
● Side to Side Cross
○ Execute the side to side dribble with your right hand two times.
○ After two side to side dribbles, execute a cross dribble to the left hand.
○ Now execute the side to side dribble with your left hand two times.
○ After two side to side dribbles, execute a cross dribble to the right hand.
○ Repeat this pattern for a certain amount of times or repetitions.
● Side to Side-Front Back
○ Dribble with the right hand a side to side dribble one time.
○ Transition to a push/pull dribble one time.
○ Go back and forth between a side to side dribble and a push/pull dribble with
the right hand.
○ Change to the left hand executing this drill.
● Front to Back-Side to Side-Cross
○ On the right side, execute a push/pull dribble once.
○ Transition to a side to side dribble once.
○ Immediately execute a cross dribble to your left hand.
○ Now complete the series with the left hand.
○ Continue for a certain amount of time or repetitions.
● Spider Dribble
○ The ball is going to be centered right in the middle of your legs.
○ This is going to help develop quick hands.
○ Begin by repping this drill without a ball.
○ Right hand touches the ball in front of the legs.
10
Breakthrough Basketball
○ Left hand then touches the ball from behind the legs.
○ Right hand then touches the ball from behind the legs.
○ Finally, the left hand touches the ball in front of the legs.
○ Continue this pattern building speed.
○ Keep your eyes up.
● One Leg Dribble
○ Dribble with the right hand clockwise around the right leg at knee height.
○ Coach will yell, “Switch” or “Rotate” and begin dribbling counterclockwise
around the right leg at knee height with the right hand.
○ Switch and follow the same pattern with the left hand dribbling around the left
leg.
● Figure 8-One Hand
○ Dribble with the right hand going around the right leg from front to back.
○ Come through between the legs and dribble around the left leg from front to
back.
○ Come through between the legs and repeat this pattern using only the right
hand.
○ Still using the right hand, switch the direction the ball is being dribbled.
○ Repeat this series with the left hand.
○ Players really need to focus on keeping eyes up and head centered.
● Figure 8-Two Hands
○ Dribble with the right hand going around the right leg from front to back.
○ Come through between the legs now dribbling with the left hand around the
left leg from front to back.
○ Come through between the legs now dribbling with the right hand around the
right leg from front to back.
○ After a certain amount of time or repetitions, switch the direction the ball is
being dribbled.
● Figure 8-Two Dribbles
○ Dribble with the right hand in front of the right leg once and push it back
between the legs.
11
Breakthrough Basketball
○ Grab the ball with the left hand and wrap it around the left leg.
○ Dribble with the left hand in front of the left leg once and push it back
between the legs.
○ Grab the ball with the right hand and wrap it around the left leg.
○ Continue this pattern.
● Coaching Tips
○ Continually remind the players about maintaining an athletic stance.
○ Give both hands the same amount of repetitions.
○ Gradually decrease the amount of time you spend on stationary dribbling.
Moving Ball Handling Drills: One Ball
● One Hand Moving Dribble
○ Players get in lines.
○ Get into an open athletic stance.
○ Off hand is active.
○ Dribble from sideline to sideline and peel off when finished.
○ Dribble with the right hand first and then switch to the left hand.
● One Hand Side to Side
○ Get into an open athletic stance.
○ Dribble from side to side while moving from sideline to sideline.
○ Peel off when reaching the opposite sideline.
○ Dribble with the right hand first and then switch to the left hand.
● Side to Side-Front to Back
○ Dribble front to back and then side to side while moving from sideline to
sideline.
○ Start slowly and get faster as a rhythm is established.
● Front to Back-Side to Side Change
○ Dribble front to back, side to side, and then cross to the left hand while
moving from sideline to sideline.
○ Dribble front to back, side to side, and then cross to the right hand while
moving from sideline to sideline.
12
Breakthrough Basketball
● One Hand One Leg
○ Dribble around the right leg with the right hand while moving from sideline to
sideline.
○ Dribble around the left leg with the left hand while moving from sideline to
sideline.
○ Can dribble in either direction around the leg.
● Figure 8 Crabwalk
○ Walk from sideline to sideline.
○ After each step, pass the ball from one hand to the other between the legs.
● Figure 8 Dribble
○ Execute a figure 8 dribble while walking from sideline to sideline.
○ Can dribble in either direction.
Stationary Ball Handling Drills: Two Balls
● Technique
○ Use an athletic stance.
○ Dribble each ball with the same amount of pressure to stay on balance.
○ Keep the balls tight to the body.
● Ball Handling Tips
○ Start slow.
○ Get in a rhythm.
○ Go hard enough that marks are made.
○ Two ball dribbling can be challenging and gets players out of their comfort
zone.
● Set up
○ Each player needs two balls.
○ Players can share balls.
■ Players not dribbling can hold up numbers for the dribbler to call out,
focusing on keeping his eyes up.
■ Players not dribbling can slap the dribbler on the shoulders or hands,
causing distractions.
13
Breakthrough Basketball
● Pound Dribble
○ Players will execute the pound dribble at knee, waist, and shoulder height with
two balls.
● Alternate Dribble
○ Players will execute the pound dribble alternating each ball at knee, waist, and
shoulder height.
● Side to Side
○ Players will execute the side to side dribble with a ball in each hand.
● Egg Beater
○ Players will dribble the balls in and out with both hands.
○ Balls will both go in at the same time and out at the same time.
● Push/Pull-In Sync
○ Players will execute a push/pull dribble with both hands.
● Push/Pull-Out of Sync
○ Players will execute a push/pull dribble with both hands.
○ While one hand is pushing the ball, the other hand is pulling the ball.
○ One is going up, and one is going back.
● One Low One High
○ Players will dribble one ball low and the other ball high.
○ One could be dribbled at knee height while the other is at waist or shoulder
height.
○ Switch hands so both hands dribble low and high.
● Crossover
○ Players execute three hard dribbles and then cross over to the opposite hand.
○ One ball goes in front and the other goes behind.
○ Progress from three hard dribbles to two hard dribbles to one hard dribble
before crossing over.
● One Ball Circle and One Ball Pound
○ Right hand dribbles around the right leg while the left hand is pound dribbling
in front of the left leg.
○ Repeat for a certain amount of time or repetitions.
14
Breakthrough Basketball
○ Switch to the left hand dribbling around the left leg while the right hand is
pound dribbling in front of the right leg.
○ Make sure to keep the ball that is pound-dribbled in front of the correct leg.
● Figure 8
○ One ball is being dribbled in the figure 8 pattern that was used before.
○ The other ball will be dribbled out in front of the body switching hands every
time the figure 8 dribbled ball comes through the legs.
Moving Ball Handling Drills: Two Balls
● 2 Ball on the Move
○ Players start with pound dribbles.
○ Coach initiates movement through gestures and calls.
■ Points behind himself and players dribble forward.
■ Points in front of himself, and players dribble backward.
■ Points to the right or left, and players dribble that direction.
■ Holds up his hands, palms up, and players stop and dribble in place.
■ Calls out, “Alternate,” and players alternate the ball heights.
■ Calls out, “Same time,” and players dribble the balls in sync.
○ This really forces the players to dribble with their eyes up.
● Follow the leader
○ Two players face each other.
○ One player becomes the leader.
○ However the leader dribbles and moves, the follower has to mirror him.
○ The leader can move forward, backward, and side to side.
○ The leader can use any of the dribbling techniques written about.
○ The quicker the movements, the more challenging it becomes.
● 2 Ball Partner Passing
○ Two players face each other.
○ One player dribbles with two balls while the other has one.
○ The player with two balls bounce passes the ball he was dribbling with his
right hand to his partner.
15
Breakthrough Basketball
○ Immediately the player then crosses the ball he was dribbling with his left
hand to his right hand, and he receives a bounce pass from his partner with
his open left hand.
○ At the same time, the partner receives the ball that was passed to him in his
left hand and crosses the ball from his left hand to his right.
○ Continue this pattern for a certain amount of time or repetitions.
○ Switch so the left hand is now passing the balls, and the right hand is receiving
the passes.
○ Switch players so both have the opportunity to dribble with two balls.
○ Players can either use a bounce pass or an air pass.
● 2 Ball Resistance
○ Partners are facing each other.
○ One partner will be dribbling two balls while the other has his hands on the
dribbler’s shoulders providing resistance.
○ As the dribbler moves forward, the partner with his hands on the shoulder is
putting pressure on him.
○ Eventually the partner will release the dribbler’s shoulders, and the dribbler
should explode and go.
Control Dribble Ball Handling Drills: One Ball
● Keys to a Controlled Dribble
○ Use an athletic stance.
○ Dribble by your back foot.
○ Pound the ball.
○ Head up and arm bar up.
● Control Dribble-Stationary
○ Turn the body so it is facing the baseline.
○ Players are going to be closed off imagining a defender is on them.
○ Players will dribble the ball by their back leg using a pound dribble.
○ Off hand is active as an arm bar.
○ Turn around and dribble with the left hand.
16
Breakthrough Basketball
● Control Dribble-Forward
○ Players will use the same form as they did in the previous drill.
○ The coach will yell out, “Green light” and “Red Light.”
■ On “Green light” the players will move forward using a step reach.
■ On “Red light” the players will stop and dribble in place.
○ Feet get further apart when you dribble.
○ Complete this drill using both hands.
● Control Dribble-Backwards
○ Once again, Players will use the same form as they did in the previous drill.
○ The coach will yell out, “Green light” and “Red Light.”
■ On “Green light” the players will move backwards using a step reach.
■ On “Red light” the players will stop and dribble in place.
■ Coach can also point signaling the players to move backwards.
■ Coach can also put his hand out, palm up signaling the players to stop
moving and dribble in place.
○ Stance should always remain wide with a controlled dribble.
● Control Dribble-Forward and Backward
○ Coach signals to players to move using hand signals
■ Forward
■ Backward
■ Right
■ Left
○ Players remained closed off, protecting the ball
○ Using hand signals requires the players to keep their eyes up.
○ Use both hands.
● 1 v 1 Control Dribble
○ Partners face each other five feet from the 3-point line.
○ Defender plays up on his partner.
○ The partner dribbling the ball needs to get to the 3-point line using a
controlled dribble.
○ Once she gets to the 3-point line, she explodes back to create space.
17
Breakthrough Basketball
○ If the defender comes out, the partner dribbling should attack the basket with
a straight line dribble.
○ If the defender stays back, the partner should open up her hips, square her
shoulders, and attack.
○ As they attack, they should work on offensive movements.
■ Use only 3 dribbles to get to the basket.
■ Stay within the lane lines.
○ Use both hands.
○ Players could run this drill anywhere on the floor to work different angles to
the basket.
Speed Dribble Ball Handling Drills
● Keys to speed dribble
■ Push the ball out in front.
■ Dribble the ball higher.
■ Keep the dribbling hand on the top side.
■ Sprint to the ball as it is pushed out.
● Speed Dribble with Quick Stop
○ Players start at the baseline.
○ Players will be in a triple threat position with the ball on the side of their body.
○ Have no false steps going sideways or backwards.
○ First step is going forward.
○ Beat people with an explosive first step and create separation.
○ Players dribble ¾ of the way down the court and end with a jump stop.
○ Players must be under control and balanced when coming to a quick stop.
○ Use both hands.
○ Challenge the players to lessen the number of dribbles needed to get ¾ of the
way down the court as they get more comfortable.
● Duke Speed Dribble
○ Start out the same way as the previous drill.
○ This time, players will switch their hands every time they dribble down the
18
Breakthrough Basketball
court.
○ By switching the dribbling hand, it protects the ball from defenders coming
from behind and knocking it away.
■ Defenders cannot time it this way.
○ Come to a quick stop ¾ of the way down the court.
● 2 Ball Speed Dribble
○ Players start with pound dribbles with both balls.
○ Coach yells, “Go!”
○ Players sprint down the court dribbling both balls in sync.
○ Players stop ¾ of the way down the court with a quick stop.
○ Emphasis should be on sprinting while dribbling.
● 2 Ball Speed Dribble Alternating
○ Players start with pound dribbles with both balls.
○ Coach yells, “Go!”
○ Players sprint down the court alternating dribbling both balls.
○ Players stop ¾ of the way down the court with a quick stop.
● Speed Dribble with Hand Signals
○ Players start in a triple threat position.
○ Coach signals to the players to tell them which direction to go.
■ Points behind himself and players dribble forward.
■ Points in front of himself, and players begin a retreat dribble.
■ Holds up his hands, palms up, and players go into a closed off
controlled dribble.
○ Make sure players use both hands during this drill.
● 1 v 1 with Chaser
○ Partners stand at mid court with one two feet behind the other.
○ The player in front must use the speed dribble to get to the basket.
○ The player behind will try to knock the ball out of the dribbler’s hands before
he attempts the layup.
○ Make sure to take the step first and push the ball out in front.
○ Players chasing cannot move until the first dribble.
19
Breakthrough Basketball
○ Players can use the Duke speed dribble technique as well.
○ Partners should stand on both sides of the basket which forces them to begin
with both hands.
○ Players dribbling should go in a straight line towards the basket.
● Partner Dribble Tag
○ Partners will each be dribbling a ball.
○ One of the partners is “it”.
○ The partner who is “it” must tag his partner.
○ If the partner gets tagged and is now “it”, he must allow his partner time to
release before attempting to tag him back.
○ This can go for a certain amount of time.
○ This can be done with using the strong hand only, weak hand only, or
alternating between them.
○ With multiple groups going at the same time, it is important for all players to
keep their heads up to avoid running into someone.
○ This is a great drill to work on changing speed and direction.
● Dribble Tab 1 v All
○ One player is “it”.
○ Once he tags someone, the tagged player is out of the drill.
○ This continues until there is no one left.
○ The next player who is “it” could be the last player tagged or the first player
tagged.
○ Coaches can vary what hand is used to dribble and who is allowed to use
which hand.
○ Dribble tag is a fun game to work on multiple ball handling skills.
Changing Speed Ball Handling Drills
● Stop and Go Move
○ Players start in a triple threat position at the baseline.
○ Coach yells, “Go,” and players begin speed dribbling.
○ Coach yells, “Stop,” and the players come to a dead stop while still dribbling.
20
Breakthrough Basketball
○ The players stay low and relax at the stop.
○ They players will also sell the fake with his head and eyes.
○ The coach will have the players stop and go 3 times before they reach ¾ of the
way down the court.
○ Make sure players complete this drill using both hands.
● Hesitation Move
○ Players start in a triple threat position at the baseline.
○ The coach yells, “Go,” and players begin speed dribbling.
○ The coach yells, “Slow,” and the players slow their speed and relax.
○ The coach yells, “Speed up,” and the players begin speed dribbling again.
○ They players will also sell the fake with his head and eyes.
○ The coach will have the players stop and go 3 times before they reach ¾ of the
way down the court.
■ The coach could put cones down and have the players complete the
drill on their own.
■ Cones would be placed at the free throw line, midcourt, and the farthest
free throw line.
○ Make sure players complete this drill using both hands.
Changing Direction Ball Handling Drills
● When is this used?
○ Use change of direction moves when the defender is chest to chest.
● Crossover
○ Technique
■ Below the knees
■ Tight to the body
■ Quick
■ Cross near the opposite foot
● Stationary Crossover
○ Player pound dribbles twice and then crossover dribble to the other hand.
○ Player pound dribbles twice with that hand and crossover dribbles to the
21
Breakthrough Basketball
original hand.
○ Work down from two pound dribbles to one pound dribble to continually
crossover dribbling.
○ Repeat this pattern for a certain amount of time or repetitions.
● Behind the Back
○ Technique
■ Keep the ball low
■ Keep the ball tight to the body
■ Snap the ball quick
■ Protects the ball with the body
● Stationary Behind the Back
○ Player pound dribbles twice and then crossover dribbles behind the back to
the other hand.
○ Player pound dribbles twice with that hand and crossover dribbles behind the
back to the original hand.
○ Work down from two pound dribbles to one pound dribble to continual
crossover behind the back dribbling.
○ Make sure the ball comes in front of the player before it is dribbled behind the
back.
○ As the players get more comfortable, they should go quicker and lower.
● Between the Legs
○ Technique
■ Chest and shoulders should be facing forward.
■ Get feet and hips pointed in the direction you want to move.
● Stationary Between the Legs
○ Player pound dribbles twice and then dribbles between the legs to the other
hand.
○ Player pound dribbles twice with that hand and dribbles between the legs to
the original hand.
○ Work down from two pound dribbles to one pound dribble to continual
between the leg dribbling.
22
Breakthrough Basketball
● Inside Out
○ Technique
■ Stay on top of the side of the basketball, so they can roll the ball over to
the middle.
■ Sell the move with a hard jab in the opposite direction.
■ Bring the ball back in the same hand to the same leg.
■ Then broad jump to get by the defender.
● Inside Out- Hand Action
○ Stand with feet shoulder width apart.
○ Take their right hand and stay on the side and top of the ball.
○ Bring the ball toward the middle and back repeatedly.
○ Use both hands during this drill.
● Inside Out- Violent Jab
○ Violently jab with the opposite foot of the hand the ball is in.
○ Bring the ball to the middle as the violent jab occurs.
○ Sell the move with head and eyes by looking in the opposite direction that you
want to go.
○ Use both hands during this drill.
● Inside out
○ Combine the two previous drills.
○ After executing the hand action and violent jab, cover ground with a long step
forward.
○ Go straight by the defender-shoulder to hip.
○ After executing the move, go back to the original spot and repeat.
○ Use both hands during this drill.
● Go To Move
○ Work on lots of moves, but make sure the player has a “go to” move.
○ Players can combine moves to make them more effective.
● Inside Out to Counter Move
○ Begin by executing an inside out move.
○ Then continue the move by adding another move.
23
Breakthrough Basketball
■ Crossover
■ Between the legs
■ Behind the back
○ After completing the move, go back to the original spot and repeat the move
or use a different one.
○ Having a double move allows the offensive player to break down the
defenders.
Cone Ball Handling Drills
● Straight/Staggered Cones-Crossover
1. Players execute a crossover at every
cone.
2. They should change speeds as well.
3. Player who is waiting should not begin
until the player in front reaches the
second cone.
4. When the player passes the last cone,
he should speed dribble back to the line.
24
Breakthrough Basketball
● Straight/Staggered Cones-Between the Legs
1. Players execute a between the legs
dribble at every cone.
2. They should change speeds as well.
3. Player who is waiting should not begin
until the player in front reaches the
second cone.
4. When the player passes the last cone,
she should speed dribble back to the
line.
● Straight/Staggered Cones-Behind the back
1. Players execute a behind the back
dribble at every cone.
2. They should change speeds as well.
3. Player who is waiting should not begin
until the player in front reaches the
second cone.
4. When the player passes the last cone,
he should speed dribble back.
25
Breakthrough Basketball
● Straight Cones-Inside Out
1. Players execute an inside out dribble at
every cone.
2. Player who is waiting should not begin
until the player in front reaches the
second cone.
3. When the player passes the last cone,
she will dribble back changing direction
every two dribbles.
4. Repeat using the left hand.
● Straight Cones- Double Move
1. Players execute a double move at every
cone.
2. Player who is waiting should not begin
until the player in front reaches the
second cone.
3. When the player passes the last cone,
he will dribble back changing direction
every two dribbles.
4. Repeat using the left hand.
26
Breakthrough Basketball
Beating Pressure Stationary Ball Handling Drills
● Keys to an Escape Dribble
○ Eyes looking forward
○ Pull the basketball back with 2 hard dribbles
○ Explore back to create space
○ Read the defense
○ Attack the slower defender
● Escape Dribble-Change directions
○ Take two hard dribbles forward.
○ Take two back dribbles.
○ Change direction and go forward for two dribbles.
○ Take two back dribbles.
○ Change direction and go forward for two dribbles.
○ Repeat these moves repeatedly for a certain amount of time.
● Escape Dribble- Inside Out
○ Take two hard dribbles forward.
○ Take two back dribbles.
○ Use the inside out dribble and go forward for two dribbles.
○ Take two back dribbles.
○ Use the inside out dribble and go forward for two dribbles.
○ Repeat these moves repeatedly for a certain amount of time.
○ Use both hands.
● Escape Dribble- Step Back Crossover
○ Take two dribbles.
○ Dip the shoulder into the defender’s chest to create space.
○ Drop the front foot hard to step back.
○ Cross quickly after dropping the front foot.
○ Start with taking two dribbles and work to using one dribble.
○ Great option to use in the front court to avoid a 5 second violation.
27
Breakthrough Basketball
● 2 Dribble- Step Back Crossover
1. Speed dribble up to the first cone.
2. Back dribble hard two dribbles and change
directions with a crossover.
3. Dribble up to the next cone.
4. Back dribble hard two dribbles and change
directions with a crossover.
5. Continue this pattern past the final cone
and on the way back to the line.
● 2 Dribble Step Back Inside Out
1. Speed dribble up to the first cone.
2. Back dribble hard two dribbles and then
execute an inside out dribble.
3. Dribble up to the next cone.
4. Back dribble hard two dribbles and then
execute an inside out dribble.
5. Continue this pattern past the final cone
and on the way back to the line.
28
Breakthrough Basketball
● 1 Dribble- Step Back Crossover
1. Speed dribble up to the first cone.
2. Upon reaching the cone, step back,
crossover, and explode to the next cone.
3. Dribble up to the next cone.
4. Upon reaching this cone, step back,
crossover, and explode to the next cone.
5. Continue this pattern past the final cone
and on the way back to the line.
6. Dip the shoulder into the defender to
create space.
29
Breakthrough Basketball
Chapter Three : Passing
Keys to Passing
● On Target: Pass to hands and eyes.
● One Time: Eyes up, face up to have vision of the whole court.
● Throw it on a Line: Make firm passes so you can pass quickly.
● Be Deceptive: Use fake passes.
● Don’t Jump to Pass: Keep both feet on the floor.
Keys to Receiving a Pass
● Give a Target: Show your hands and prepare early to catch a ball.
● Go Meet the Basketball: When the basketball is in the air, the player’s feet should be
in the air, go meet the basketball to shorten the pass.
● Catch with your eyes, hands and feet.
Stationary Passing
● Chest Pass
○ Start with the thumbs facing in.
○ Step as the pass is thrown.
○ Lock elbows and snap the wrists.
○ Finish hands facing out and thumbs down.
○ Partners should be standing fifteen feet apart.
○ Receivers of the pass should prepare early and be in an athletic stance before
catching the ball.
■ Show a target and meet the ball in the air, feet in the air.
○ Having the players call out names encourages communication.
○ Complete for a certain amount of time or repetitions.
● Bounce Pass
○ Same concepts as the chest pass
■ Hands to the outside
30
Breakthrough Basketball
■ Thumbs facing to the inside
■ Step with the lead foot with a lunge
■ Shoulders and head should be directly over the lead knee.
■ Finish hands facing out and thumbs down.
○ Throw a bounce pass three-quarters of the way to the receiver at waist height.
○ Complete for a certain amount of time or repetitions.
● Flick Pass
○ Also called the “haircut” pass because it passes right to the side of the
defender’s head.
■ Throw it right by the defender’s ear.
■ Lock the elbow at the end of the throw.
■ Flick the wrist.
■ Throw it with one hand.
○ Try to practice 3 times more with the weak hand.
○ Step with the same foot as the hand that is making the pass.
○ Add a fake.
■ Try to move the defender’s hands.
■ Fake a low pass using head and eyes and lower the ball only an inch or
two.
■ Then throw a high pass.
■ The ball fake will move the opponent’s hand and open up a passing
angle.
○ Complete for a certain amount of time or repetitions.
● Flick Bounce Pass
○ Rip the ball from shoulder to shoulder.
○ Step across the body with the opposite foot as the hand that is passing the
ball, stepping through the defender.
○ Throw a right handed flick bounce pass.
○ Make sure to make the pass with the left hand as well.
● Overhead Pass
○ Same grip as the traditional chest and bounce passes.
31
Breakthrough Basketball
○ Passer keeps the ball tight as it moves to his head.
○ Step with the lead foot.
○ Lock elbows and snap wrists.
○ Aim at the receiver’s forehead creating a downward flight for the ball.
○ Uses of the overhead pass
■ Skip pass against a zone defense.
■ Advancing the ball up the floor quickly.
■ Passing the ball inbounds.
○ Complete for a certain amount of time or repetitions.
● Baseball Pass
○ Hold the ball in the dominant hand with the off hand on the side of the ball.
○ Take a lead step.
○ Bring the ball at ear level height.
○ Lock the elbow, snap the wrist, and follow through.
○ Put some arc and rotation on the pass.
○ Complete for a certain amount of time or repetitions.
● 2 Ball Flick Passes
○ Partners stand fifteen feet apart.
○ Both have a basketball.
○ They continually and quickly throw flick passes back and forth.
○ Make sure to make the pass with the left hand as well.
○ Complete for a certain amount of time or repetitions.
● CP3 Passing
○ Exaggerate sitting down in a stance.
○ Keep the eyes up.
○ Locking the elbow and snapping the wrist.
○ Passes thrown on a line.
○ Partners stand 5-8 feet apart.
○ Hold the ball in their right hand.
○ Both players throw an air pass.
○ The receivers catch with the hand that did not throw the ball.
32
Breakthrough Basketball
○ The receiver now throws the ball back with the hand that caught the pass.
○ They continually throw this way for a period of time or amount of repetitions.
○ Throw an air pass when possible since it gets there quicker.
○ Add a bounce pass
■ Same setup as the air pass.
■ Throw with one hand and catch with one hand.
● Flick Pass-Air and Bounce
○ Partners stand 5-8 feet apart.
○ Hold the ball in their right hand.
○ One player throws an air pass while the other throws a bounce pass.
○ One side will be all bounce passes and the other side will be air passes.
● Flick Pass off the Dribble
○ Partners stand 5-8 feet apart.
○ Hold the ball in their right hand.
○ Smash dribble and pass the ball immediately,
○ Receive the ball from the partner, smash dribble, and pass the ball
immediately back.
○ Make sure receivers present a target.
○ Continue this pattern.
● Crossover Flick Pass
○ Partners stand 5-8 feet apart.
○ Hold the ball in their right hand.
○ Smash dribble, crossover dribble, and pass the ball immediately.
○ Receive the ball from the partner, smash dribble, crossover dribble, and pass
the ball immediately back.
○ Continue this pattern.
○ Make sure to complete this drill with both hands.
● Double Move Flick Pass
○ Partners stand 5-8 feet apart.
○ Hold the ball in their right hand.
○ Smash dribble, crossover left and right, and pass the ball immediately,
33
Breakthrough Basketball
○ Receive the ball from the partner, smash dribble, crossover left and right, and
pass the ball immediately back.
○ Continue this pattern.
○ Make sure to complete this drill with both hands.
On the Move Passing
● Line Passing
1. Start at the baseline in a triple threat stance.
2. First step should be big and explosive.
3. Execute a hard smash dribble with inside hand
and come to a quick stop.
4. The partner should be running even with the
person dribbling the ball.
5. Dribbler steps with his inside foot and passes a
flick pass with his inside hand.
6. Receiver catches the ball with the ball in the air,
feet in the air.
7. Catch the ball and turn in the air to face up. If
the receiver cannot turn in the air, he can land
and turn and face.
8. The receiver now becomes the dribbler and the
pattern continues down the court.
● Line Passing with Rip
○ Same setup as previous drill.
○ Dribble with the outside hand.
○ When dribble quick stops, he should step through the defender while ripping
the ball across his body.
○ He will finish with a quick flick pass with his outside hand.
34
Breakthrough Basketball
● Monkey in the Middle
1. Passers stand fifteen feet apart with a
defender in the middle.
2. The defender is passive, placing her arms
either high or low.
3. The person with the ball must read the
defender's arms and make the proper pass.
4. As soon as the pass goes to her partner,
she follows the ball and becomes the next
defender.
5. The person who was on defense replaces
her as the receiver of the next pass.
6. The person who receives the ball now
reads the arms of the defender and
makes the proper pass.
7. As soon as she passes, she follows the ball
and becomes the next defender.
8. This pattern continues throughout the drill.
35
Breakthrough Basketball
● Monkey in the Middle (Live)
○ It is the same drill as before with a few changes.
■ Player cannot pass the ball until the defender touches him.
■ The defender is trying to steal the ball.
○ Passing tips
■ Be in an athletic stance.
■ Rip the ball through hard.
■ Make pass fakes to move hands.
■ Be strong with the ball.
■ Don’t become unbalanced by keeping a strong base.
○ Players can rotate every 30-40 seconds or when a player gets a deflection.
○ If running the drill for a certain amount of time, the player with the most
deflections wins.
● Triangle Passing 3 v 1
○ Triangle passing emphasizes decision making.
○ Great drill for forcing players to use pass fakes.
● Defender stays in the middle of the triangle
and tries to deflect the ball as it is passed
from player to player.
● Passers need to be deceptive by using pass
fakes and moving the defender by looking
in the opposite direction of the pass.
● Avoid slow passes and bounce passes.
● Defender can bluff, anticipate, stand
between the receivers, or be up on the ball.
● Defenders can stay in for a certain amount of time and count the number of
deflections.
● If a defender gets a deflection, he can replace the passer who makes the error.
36
Breakthrough Basketball
● Triangle Passing 3 v 2
● One defender is on the ball applying ball
pressure.
● The other defender is an anticipator.
● Passers should square up their shoulders
to give themselves multiple passing
options.
● After the pass, the anticipator immediately
becomes the defender applying ball
pressure.
37
Breakthrough Basketball
Chapter Four: Finishing Moves
Why focus on finishing moves?
● Young players miss up to 80% of their shots.
● Players need to feel comfortable attacking the basket.
○ when defenders are present
○ finishing with both hands
● The closer the shot is to the basket the better chance of making it.
● Goal is to have players finish at the rim with either hand.
● With younger players, start without using a basketball.
● Shooting a layup off of two feet gives the player more strength and power.
Keys to Finishing
● Pick the ball up with 2 hands.
● Rip the ball to the ear.
● Keep the ball in private property.
● Shooting hand and elbow behind the ball and follow through.
● Be on balance.
● Start low and finish high.
● Head up and back up.
● Jump UP, not out.
● Drive the outside knee up toward the basket.
● Don’t be afraid to bank the basketball.
● Get a good angle to use the backboard.
Drills
● Cadence Drill
○ Coach yells out directions for the players to follow.
■ “Stance” and the players get into athletic stance.
38
Breakthrough Basketball
■ “Right” and the players will take a step with their right foot.
■ “Dribble” and the players will take one dribble.
■ “Rip” and the players will rip the ball up to their ear.
■ “Left step” and the players will take a step with their left foot and
explode up, driving the knee up high as they shoot a right handed
layup.
○ Complete using both hands.
○ Can have the players go off of two feet as well.
■ Add another step in the cadence, so the players must go off two feet.
○ Cadence helps players do each step of a layup correctly.
● Layup-0 Dribbles
○ Start in close on the block in a lunge stance.
○ Inside foot will be back with the ball on the outside.
○ Step win the inside foot and plant it.
○ Drive the outside knee up.
○ Angle toward the top of the square
○ Try to hit the upper right-corner of the square for a right-hand layup.
○ Do not turn and open up allowing the defender to knock the ball away.
○ Jump high-don’t jump forward.
○ Perform the 0 step layups on both sides of the basket using both hands.
● Layup-1 Dribble
○ Outside foot is now back and the inside foot is forward.
○ Ball should be on the outside away from the defender.
○ Step with the outside foot and dribble.
○ Step and plant with the inside foot.
○ Drive up with the outside knee and finish the layup.
○ Perform the 1 step layups on both sides of the basket using both hands.
● Layup-1 Dribble Elbow
○ Start in a triple threat stance at the elbow.
○ The player must go hard and attack the rim to get there in 1 dribble.
○ Perform the layups on both sides of the basket using both hands.
39
Breakthrough Basketball
● Layup-1 Dribble 3-Point Line
○ Start in a triple threat stance at the elbow.
○ The player must go hard and attack the rim to get there in 1 dribble.
○ Perform the layups on both sides of the basket using both hands.
● 1 v 1 with a Chair
1. Defensive player sits in the chair.
2. Offensive player starts in a triple threat
stance and initiates the drill with a direct
step drive.
3. He dribbles in a straight line to the basket.
4. As soon as the ball hits the ground, the
defender needs to get up and try to prevent
the offensive player from scoring.
○ Players can finish going off of one foot.
○ If the player anticipates contact, he can quick stop and use a two foot power
finish.
● 1 v 1 with a Chair-Variations
○ The same as the drill with one change.
■ Players will begin with a crossover step or a step through and rip the
ball before dribbling in a straight line to the basket.
■ Players could step through going to the middle.
■ The offensive players threw a pass to themselves, pivot, and then drive
to the basket.
● add layers after the pivot
40
Breakthrough Basketball
● Dematha Finishing
1. Both players will start at the elbow.
2. The coach will pass the ball to one of the
players.
3. The player with the ball will try to score
before the player who did not receive the
pass tries to cut him off.
4. The offensive player can go off one foot or
use a two foot power finish.
○ The coach can make it more challenging.
■ Toss the ball out farther.
■ Throw it right next to the player.
■ Bounce the ball up high between the players.
41
Breakthrough Basketball
Chapter Five: Shooting
Shooting Technique (BEEF)
● Balance
○ Feet should be hip-width apart.
○ Shooting foot slightly in front.
○ Head should be centered with your body.
● Eyes
○ Focus on the target.
○ Focus on the center of the goal, or the back of the rim.
● Elbow
○ Elbow should be up, in, and under the basketball.
○ Elbow aligned with your hand.
○ Fingers slightly spread apart.
○ Hand relaxed.
○ Daylight between ball and hand.
● Follow Through
○ Proper arc gives you a larger margin for error when shooting.
○ Backspin helps deaden the ball if it hits the rim.
○ Elbow should go: up, up, and out.
○ Elbow finishes above the eye.
○ Pinky should finish up.
○ Drive the index finger through the center of the rim.
○ Freeze and hold the finish.
○ Land slightly in front of the point the jump began.
42
Breakthrough Basketball
Shooting Drills
● Pendulum Shooting
○ Start in a shooting stance.
○ Place shooting hand on shooting knee.
○ Players will raise the shooting hand and swing it up and back on the side of
their body.
○ Coach will yell, “Set,” and the players will lock their elbows directly out in front
of their shooting eye with their hand up as if it was holding the basketball.
○ Coach will yell, “Shot,” and the players will pretend to shoot the basketball with
their hand, making sure to follow through up on their tippy toes.
○ Do not rush this drill.
■ Check balance
■ Eyes
■ Elbow
■ Follow through
● Lying Down Shooting-One Hand
○ This is a great drill to improve rotation and follow through.
○ Players lie on their back on the floor.
○ Place the ball in their lead hand.
○ Elbow is on the ground.
○ Players will extend their arm, lock their elbow, and snap their wrist releasing
the ball into the air.
○ Ball should go in a straight line up and back down.
○ Players should focus on following through with the index finger going through
the ball.
○ The goal is to get great rotation on the ball-snap the wrist and lock the elbow.
○ With younger players, a partner could be used to catch the ball after the
shooter releases it.
● Lying Down Shooting-Two Hands
○ Players now add the off hand to the ball as they complete the drill.
43
Breakthrough Basketball
■ Off hand is on the side of the ball.
■ Four fingers pointed toward the ceiling.
■ Form a T with the thumbs.
○ As players get stronger, they could begin with their elbow off of the floor,
bringing the ball closer to the shooting eye.
● Line Shooting- One Hand
○ Partners stand 12 feet apart.
○ Players align themselves with a line- the goal is to have the ball land on the
line.
○ Every time the shooter’s ball lands on the line, he gets a point.
○ Great shooters do not miss right or left.
● Line Shooting- Two Hands
○ Players add their off hand (guide hand) to the ball in the drill.
○ Bring the ball up with the shooting hand and then add the guide hand.
○ Make sure the players are using proper form.
■ Hips apart
■ Staggered feet
■ Elbow up
■ Follow through
○ As the players progress, layers of the drill can be added.
■ The ball could start in their shooting pocket.
■ Players can dribble and do a ball pick up before shooting.
● Backboard Shooting- One Hand
○ Backboard shooting allows players to focus on mechanics-not makes and
misses.
○ Player stands facing the backboard to the side of the basket.
○ Player shoots the basketball with the goal of hitting the backboard in the same
spot every time.
● Backboard Shooting- One Hand
○ Players add their off hand (guide hand) to the ball in the drill.
○ Players bring the ball up with their shooting hand and then add their guide
44
Breakthrough Basketball
hand.
○ Hips should be down and back ready to shoot the ball.
● Backboard Shooting- Shooting Pocket
○ Same goal as in the previous drill.
○ The ball now starts in the player’s shooting pocket.
○ Players can dribble and do a ball pick up before shooting.
○ Backboard shooting could be done at a wall as well.
Form Shooting
● Feather Shooting- One Hand
1. Players will practice form shooting from all
five spots with one hand.
2. Players can stand under the hoop and take
one giant step back.
3. With beginning players, have them make
one from each spot and rotate.
4. As players develop, add to the number of
shots needed to be made before rotating.
5. Also can have players take a step and a half
backwards.
● Feather Shooting- Two Hands
1. Players will practice form shooting with two
hands from all five spots with one hand.
2. Players start a step and a half away from the
rim.
3. Players should check balance, eyes, elbow,
and follow through on every shot.
4. Players rotate around the basket after
making a certain number of shots.
45
Breakthrough Basketball
● Feather Shooting- Shot Pocket
1. Players take two giant steps away from the
rim.
2. The ball now starts in the player’s shooting
pocket.
3. Players rotate around the basket after
making a certain number of shots.
4. After releasing the ball, the feet should land
slightly in front of where they started.
5. Players should start close and move back
gradually.
6. Players should NOT progress further away
from the basket if their mechanics fall apart
trying to get the ball to the basket.
Shooting Drills
● Preparing for the Shot
○ Huge key to having a quick shot is preparing early.
○ Hips down and show hands.
○ The receiver’s feet should be in the air while catching the ball.
■ Receivers could catch the ball, land on their non-shooting leg and take a
step with their shooting.
■ Receivers could hop and land on staggered feet.
○ Players should learn the 1-2 step and the hop.
46
Breakthrough Basketball
● Klay Thompson Shooting
1. Player’s hips are down and his hands are
showing.
2. Player calls for the ball.
3. Player receives a pass from his partner.
4. She receives the pass using the 1-2 step or
hop.
5. She shoots the ball focusing on form.
6. If the player makes two in a row, she steps
back one giant step and continues.
7. The player continues moving backward after
making two shots in a row.
8. If the player misses two shots in a row, she
takes one giant step closer to the basket and
continues.
9. This drill helps identify a player’s shooting
range.
● Game Shots
○ Speed dribble to a quick stop and pivot toward the basket.
■ Players should mix up how they dribble the ball out to the perimeter.
○ Player ball tosses to himself and catches it with a 1-2 step (right hand shooters
land left-right; left hand shooters land right-left).
○ Start slow and gradually add speed.
○ Finish any shots that are missed.
○ Repeat the drill for a certain amount of time.
● Game Shots: Pivot
○ This drill is patterned after the previous drill.
47
Breakthrough Basketball
○ The player this time will pass it to himself and turn in the air to complete a
four pivot while catching the ball.
■ The player needs to work on proper foot positioning while the ball is in
the air.
○ This drill improves footwork, ball handling, and shooting.
● 3 Person/2 Ball Shooting
1. Player one calls the ball as he stands at the
elbow with hips down and hands showing.
2. Player two throws him an air pass and
immediately sprints to the opposite elbow.
3. Player one shoots, rebounds his shot, and
gets into the line.
4. Player three passes an air pass to player
number two and immediately sprints to the
opposite elbow.
5. Player two shoots, rebounds his shot, and
gets into the line.
6. Players rebound their own shot and always
pass to the same person.
○ Make sure to have players shoot within their range.
○ Players can progress to shoot further away.
○ Experienced players can also 1 dribble pull up with this drill.
○ Add a competitive element to the drill.
■ When drills become more competitive, players will go harder.
48
Breakthrough Basketball
Chapter Six: Rebounding
Rebounding Technique
● Make first contact.
● Put forearm in the opponent’s chest.
● Quick turn to seal off the opponent.
● Make contact with your butt.
● Keep your hands up high.
● Rebound the ball with 2 hands.
● Rebound like a jet- go out and up.
● On a defensive rebound, pivot to the outside of the court to look for an outlet.
Rebounding Tips
● Have a rebounding mentality
○ Believe every shot is going to be missed.
● Anticipate where the shot will go.
○ 70% of rebounds come off on the opposite side from where the shot was
taken.
○ The longer the shot, the longer the rebound.
● Players should not get “stuck” on their defender when offensive rebounding.
49
Breakthrough Basketball
Rebounding Drills
● Shadow Rebounding
1. The partners on the right side will be the
defenders.
2. Coach will yell, “Shot!”
3. The defender must keep her butt down and
stay lower than the offensive player.
4. The defender will step across with her right
foot and make contact on the offensive
player’s chest with her forearm.
5. As soon as the defender makes contact, she
will make a quick turn putting her butt and
back into the offensive player.
6. The defender will raise her hands up as
well.
7. The coach will tell the offensive player
which way to move.
8. When the offensive player goes to her is left
or right, the defender will push step in the
same direction.
● Make sure the offensive players go to the right and the left.
● Both partners should play the role of the defender.
● As the players develop, add variations to the drill.
○ The coach will yell,”Shot,” but not say which direction for the offensive players
to go. The coach will point in the direction the offensive player should move.
■ The defenders will now have to read the offensive player.
○ The coach can yell,” Go get it!” The defensive players will jump up and grab the
50
Breakthrough Basketball
imaginary ball with two hands.
■ The defenders should start skinny when they jump for the rebound but
land big.
■ They should also chin the imaginary basketball to protect it from
potential defenders.
● Bull in the Ring
1. The defender has a ball behind him.
2. The coach will yell, “Shot!”
3. The defender will box out the offensive
player.
4. The goal is to keep the offensive player
away from the ball for 4 seconds.
○ The offensive player must remain active. He can spin or use a swim move.
○ Smaller players need a low center of gravity to avoid being pushed easily.
○ Whoever loses can have a consequence like two push-ups.
○ Players need to keep their head over their body to stay on balance.
○ Both players should play the role of the defender.
● Backboard Rebounding
1. Players will stand in a line facing the
basket.
2. One by one, they will throw the ball up off
the backboard.
3. They are going to jump up, grab the ball
with two hands, and land on two feet.
4. They will then go right back up and shoot
the ball.
51
Breakthrough Basketball
○ Players should try to grab the rebound when the ball is at its highest point.
○ Players should keep their shoulders parallel to the backboard.
● Backboard Rebounding-Shot Fake
○ The drill is run the same way as the previous drill.
○ Upon catching the rebound, the players will execute a pump fake before
shooting the ball.
■ Head and ball should move on the shot fake-not the hips.
● 1 v 1 Rebounding
1. Coach will toss the ball off the backboard.
2. The two players at the front of the line will
try to get to the rebound first.
3. Whoever gets the ball first, becomes an
offensive player trying to score.
4. The player who does not get the ball
becomes the defender.
5. The offensive player can pass the ball back
to the coach to receive a pass back.
○ Someone must score.
■ If the defender gets the second rebound, he gives it back to the coach
who initiates the drill again by throwing it off the backboard.
○ The number of dribbles could be limited.
■ Limiting dribbles makes players use them wisely.
52
Breakthrough Basketball
● 2 v 2 Rebounding Battle
1. Two defensive players stand on the
baseline. One will have a ball.
2. Two offensive players will stand on the
elbow showing hands ready for a pass.
3. The defensive player with the ball will make
an air pass to either of the two offensive
players.
4. The two defensive players sprint out to the
offensive players.
5. They will close out on the offensive players
chopping their feet the last half of the way.
6. Offense must catch and shoot immediately.
7. The defense will box out and try to get the
rebound.
○ If the defense gets the rebound, they go on offense and receive a point.
○ If the offense makes the shot or gets the rebound, they stay on offense and
receive a point.
○ First team to 3 points wins.
○ This can be played with 6 players as well with the additional pair standing
between the pairs in the diagram.
● 2 v 2 Rebounding Battle Live
○ This is set up like the previous drill with a few changes.
○ Whoever gets the rebound immediately tries to score playing live 2 on 2.
53
Breakthrough Basketball
○ If the defense does not prevent the offense from scoring or rebounding, they
rotate out and a new group comes in.
● 2 v 2 Helpside D Rebounding
1. Two offensive players start at the 3 point
line.
2. The coach yells, “Skip,” and the offensive
players skip passes to one another while
the defensive players rotate from on ball
defense to help defensive.
4. The coach yells, “Shot,” and the offensive
player with the ball immediately shoots.
5. The defenders allow the offensive player
to shoot and box out immediately after.
○ All players try to rebound the ball.
■ Offense can stay on offense if they get the rebound.
■ Defense can get out if they get a defensive rebound.
● Defense could need 2 rebounds or 2 consecutive rebounds in
order to exit the drill.
■ Rebound if the ball is missed OR made.
○ Keep as many kids active as possible
■ If the defense gets the rebound, the offensive player goes on defense
and a new player comes in on offense.
■ If the offensive player gets the rebound, the defensive player exits and a
new player replaces him.
● 2 v 2 Helpside D Rebounding Live
○ This is set up like the previous drill with a few changes.
○ Whoever gets the rebound immediately tries to score playing live 2 on 2.
○ Play it out live even if the initial shot is made.
54
Breakthrough Basketball
Chapter Seven: Offensive Concepts
Offensive Concepts Tip
● Add skill work when doing offensive concepts to get the most out of the time at
practice.
● Have the players dribble to the back of the line for more ball handling practice.
Offensive Concepts 1 v 0
● Fill Cut- Jump Shot
1. Players stand at the 3-point line extended
with the ball.
2. The first player passes to the coach and
executes a fill cut.
3. The coach passes the ball player to the
player who catches the ball and squares up
to the basket.
4. The player shoots the ball,rebounds it
if it is missed, and puts it in.
● Fill Cut- Jump Shot
1. The first player passes to the coach.
2. The player executes a fill cut.
3. The coach passes the ball player to the
player who catches the ball and squares
up to the basket.
4. The player steps through and drives to the
basket for a layup.
55
Breakthrough Basketball
○ Shoulder should be to the defender’s hip on the step through.
○ Players should attack the weak side when driving to the basket.
○ Encourage players to get to the basket only using 1 dribble.
● Fill Cut-Jump Shot
1. The first player passes to the coach.
2. The player executes a fill cut.
3. The coach passes the ball player to the
player who catches the ball and squares
up to the basket.
4. The player steps through, drives to the
basket using one dribble, and pulls up for
a jump shot.
● Fill Cut-Change Direction Lay Up
1. The drill starts the same as the previous
drills.
2. Upon receiving the coach’s pass, the player
will step through and drive to the basket
attacking the weak side.
3. After one dribble, the player will change
direction using a change of direction
dribble and finish with a layup on the
opposite side.
56
Breakthrough Basketball
● Fill Cut-Change Direction Pull Up
1. The drill starts the same as the previous
drills.
2. Upon receiving the coach’s pass, the player
will step through and drive to the basket
attacking the weak side.
3. After one dribble, the player will change
direction using a change of direction
dribble once or twice and pull up for a
jump shot.
○ All drills in this progression do not need to be run every practice.
■ Start with the first one at a practice.
■ Then add a new drill each practice.
■ Once the players know all of the progressions, choose 3 to work on at
each practice.
● Fill Cuts- 1 v 1
1. The coach starts with the ball.
2. Both places race around the cones.
3. The offensive player receives the ball and
tries to score using the moves from the fill
cut progression drill series.
4. The offensive player can only use 3
dribbles to score.
○ Instead of using a cone for the defender to run around, the player could just
run around the block.
○ The offensive player should first think, “Shot!”
○ If the player is cut off in one direction, he should make a counter move to get
to the basket.
57
Breakthrough Basketball
● L Cut-Sweep
1. Player runs across the lane and executes an
L-cut.
2. The coach passes him the ball.
3. Upon receiving the ball, the player back
pivots.
4. The player then completes a hard sweep
and attacks the basket.
● L Cut- 1 Dribble Pull up
○ The drill starts the same as the previous drill.
○ Instead of driving all the way to the basket, the player will dribble once and
pull up for a jump shot.
● L Cut- Variations
○ Players could drive to the basket and use a change of direction dribble to
finish on the opposite side of the basket.
○ Players could drive to the basket, use a change of direction dribble, and pull
up for a jump shot.
● L Cut- 1 v 1
1. Player passes to the coach and runs across
the lane and executes an L-cut.
2. The defender on the block push steps
parallel to the offensive player.
3. The coach passes the offensive player the
ball.
4. The defensive player sprints up and closes
out on the offensive player.
5. The offensive player tries to score.
58
Breakthrough Basketball
○ The coach can change the location of where the defender starts.
■ By doing this, it will change the shots the offense will have.
○ 1 v 1 drills will help players learn to read defenses.
59
Breakthrough Basketball
Chapter Seven: Closing Remarks
Why is Skill Development Important?
● If young players don’t build their skills early and develop a solid foundation, they will
struggle to make the teams at the junior high and high school levels.
● Youth coaches should look at long term goals.
○ Start basic and progress to more challenging skills and drills.
○ The ultimate goal is to develop players for the future, not on winning right
now.
When Should Skill Development be Taught?
● Make sure skill development is planned in every practice.
● Start with isolated skills sets and progress to 1 v 1 type drills.
● Layer the drills.
○ The players can add different skills to the drills as they progress.
● Players can be given work out plans to complete at home.
● Try to instill the idea into the players that the more time they work at home, the
better they will be.
60
Breakthrough Basketball