
Table of Contents
Table of Contents 1
Chapter One: Offensive Concepts 4
5 Things That Make Up Great Offense 5
Chapter Three: Ball Security 6
Ball Toughness 6
1v0 Create space 6
1v1 Stationary 6
1v1 Live 6
Chapter Four: Passing, Catching and Cutting 7
3-Man Stationary Passing 7
Cutting to Score 7
Cutting to Get open 8
V Cut - Face Cut 8
Fill Cut - Rear Cut - Backdoor 9
Chapter Five: Offensive Build - Up 10
1v1 Live 10
2v0 10
2v2 Live 11
3v0 12
3v3 13
4v0 13
4v4 13
5v0 - 5v5 No Post 14
5v0 - 5v5 Temporary Post 15
Chapter Six: Penetrate and Pitch 16
Being Shot Ready 16
2v0 16
2v2 17
3v3 18
Chapter Seven: Dribble Hand-Off 19
Chapter Eight: 5v5 21
Chapter Nine: Cutters 22
Cut and Fill 22
Unbalanced Floor 22
Chapter Ten: Away Screens 24
Screener - the emphasis of the screener should be: 24
Player Coming Off Screen - The emphasis of the player coming off the screen should be:
24
Chapter Eleven: Ball Screens 26
Chapter One: Offensive Concepts
Teaching motion offense to the youth is very important. We need to teach kids how
to play rather than teaching them how to run a play. The Motion Offense allows
you to teach players concepts. Once your players master spacing, ball movement,
and player movement then you can begin to add layers to the offense such as
handoffs, ball screens, and away screens.
Youth basketball should be positionless. Running a patterned offense with youth
can be detrimental to their development. A player can be 6’0 in 7th grade and
asked to play with their back to the basket to win games. It’s possible that the same
kid is now a sophomore in high school and hasn't grown. They can’t get away with
the same things in high school that they got away with in middle school and now
they lack the skills necessary to move to the perimeter.
By developing a positionless basketball offense, you will be developing the skills of
every player equally, which should be a goal when coaching youth basketball
players.
Chapter Two: 5v0 Introduction
At the beginning, show them the finished
product.
Take the 5 kids and space them on the
perimeter.
● The ball should be at the top of the key
● A player occupying each corner
● A player occupying each wing
Numbers are arbitrary, remember this is a positionless offense.
5 Things That Make Up Great Offense
1. Great spacing - Depending on the strength of your players you want about
15 feet of space between players. Offense is spacing. Spacing is offense.
2. Ball movement - Ball reversals break down the defense.
3. Player movement - Pass and move - teach 3 options after pass: on ball
screen, off ball screen, cut to basket.
4. Take uncontested, high percentage shots - If a kid can make an
uncontested shot in practice at 50%. That is a good shot to shoot in a game.
“It’s not your shot, it’s our shot” make it count.
5. Have skilled players - Prioritize skill development.
Chapter Three: Ball Security
Ball Toughness
Low Ball Rips - Have players sit in a stance. Rip the ball low and violently from side to
side. Keep the ball connected. Elbow at 90 degree angle at all times. Do not extend
elbows essentially disconnecting the ball from the body.
● High Ball Rips - Rip across the forehead with the same 90 degree angle.
● Combo Rips - Have players mix high and low rips simultaneously.
1v0 Create space
Creating space to face up to the basket. Simulating a defender in your players’
bubble we want to create some space. Have players step into the imaginary
defender without lunging and getting an offensive foul. Have a player stay within
the frame they create with their step, meaning don’t allow players shoulders to go
beyond their feet. With this “jab” / pivot step. Incorporate high and low rips to build
ball toughness.
1v1 Stationary
Offense starts facing the basket. Defense is harassing the ball handler if the
defender fouls that is ok. Offense must be strong with the ball and face the basket
for the duration of the drill.
Next progression. Offense is facing away from the basket, now the offense needs to
work to face up and proceed to handle pressure while facing the basket.
1v1 Live
Offense has to handle pressure with rips and jabs until the coach says “Go” at this
time the offense can attack the basket in a 1v1 situation.
These are development drills. Emphasis essential skills needed to be successful.
● Example: Driving in a straight line, staying low, absorbing contact, etc.
Chapter Four: Passing, Catching and Cutting
Passing and catching are under emphasized skills in today’s game. The ooh’s and
ah’s generally trend toward dribble moves and fancy finishes. Players that can pass
and catch at a high level make the game easier for themselves and essentially their
teammates as well.
3-Man Stationary Passing
● In Groups of 3. Coach will designate a
pivot foot to which each player will step
into their pass stepping in with the
appropriate foot.
● Players should lock their elbow and snap
their wrist.
● As each player receives a pass. They
should catch the ball in the triple threat
position. “Ball in the air; Feet in the air”
Cutting to Score
Players cutting to the basket is one of the times where being selfish pays off. If a
player cuts hard to score, the team has a great opportunity for 2 points or that
player has likely gained the attention of one or more extra defenders, thus freeing
up a teammate. Be selfish, cut hard to score every time.
Cuts for a score should be to the front of the rim for 2 reasons:
1. An easier pass to make for the passer. This will shorten the length of the pass
slightly and ensure that the cutter is not drifting away from the passer on
their cut.
2. If the cutter catches and they do not have a strong side finish they have a
much better chance to get to the opposite side for a reverse or if he/she is
cut off can make a pass to the perimeter easier because they are not stuck
behind the basket or on the 3rd of the floor that they started on.
Cutting to Get open
Cutting to get open is important for a number of reasons:
● Your best player needs to get the ball.
● Someone needs to catch in a specific spot to run a set.
● Your ball handler is being harassed and someone needs to relieve pressure.
In general being able to get open creates safer passes and can lower turnover
rates.
V Cut - Face Cut
This drill can help develop multiple skills while incorporating cutting to score and
cutting to get open.
● Player 4 will V cut to get open.
● A coach can step in and play defense to
get an idea of what a game situation
would look like.
● Player 4 will receive a pass and while
using the “ball in the air feet in the air”
approach and proceed to return the pass
to Player 1.
● After player 4 returns the pass and
makes the read that x4 has not jumped
to the ball, player 4 will then Face Cut x4
and receive a pass for a layup.
Fill Cut - Rear Cut - Backdoor
1. Player 4 will Fill Cut to the wing and
receive a pass from 1.
2. Working on being in a triple threat
position on the catch.
3. 4 will return the pass and rather than
face cutting, 4 will Rear Cut (cut behind
the defender.)
4. When 4 does not receive a pass for a
score he/she will Exit Cut back to the
corner.
● 4 will Fill Cut again.
● This time 4 will be overplayed and Back
Door Cut.
● 1 will hit 4 for a layup.
● Players rotate lines and continue.
Chapter Five: Offensive Build-Up
1v1 Live
Having good 1v1 players translates directly into 5v5. If you are a better 1v1
offensive player, team offense has a higher ceiling. If you have good 1v1 Defenders
team defense has a higher ceiling. Do not undervalue 1v1 done the correct way.
● Coach will start with the ball.
● Player 1 will cut to get open on the
perimeter and the drill is live.
● Player 1 may return the pass to the
coach once and cut to score or cut to get
open again.
2v0
● In this drill emphasize air passes. Air
passes, unlike bounce passes, are faster,
generally more accurate, and easier to
catch especially on the run. The window
to throw a bounce pass is also much
smaller than the window of time an air
pass is available.
● As player 2 catches the ball in triple
threat. Player 1 should be in the process
of Exit Cutting.
● Player 2 will reverse the ball to the corner
occupied by Player 1, Basket Cut, and
receive a pass for a layup.
Progression
● As player 1 is Exit Cutting, Back Door Cut
for a layup.
● These shots will be along the Baseline
and can be a difficult finish off of one
foot without a great angle to use the
backboard.
● Emphasis a 2 foot stop and square. 10
toes facing the baseline and using the
top corner of the square.
2v2 Live
Now everything that has been covered to this point is in play. Passing and cutting in
live action. In this drill the defense will be required to pressure everywhere. This is
necessary to develop the skills needed to punish pressure and loosen it up.
Rules:
1. Ball starts with player 1 and throws to Coach at the top of the key initiates
the possession.
2. Start no dribble. Progress to 1 dribble, then 2 dribbles.
3. Use 1 side of the floor
4. Defense must pressure passes and catches.
5. Offense is trying to score on a Face Cut, Rear Cut, or a Backdoor Cut.
Reminders for players:
● Look for the ball on all cuts.
● Cut selfishly! Cut to score!
● Finish your cut at the basket.
● Create contact when trying to get open if
needed.
3v0
● V cut to get open
● Finish cuts to the rim
● Ball in the air feet in the air on all catches
● Fill in a straight line to the wing
● Look for basketball on all cuts.
*Coaches if you want to add a small layer, step out and deny a fill reversal forcing a
back door and another fill. *
3v3
● Use 3v0 set up and add a passive dummy defense and 0 dribbles at first.
○ Players should change speeds and cut hard
● Offense is looking to score on cuts so make sure players are catching in triple
threat using “ball in the air feet in the air” footwork so they don’t miss the
opportunity to hit a cutter for a score.
Adding dribbles
● When adding dribbles make players understand that if they use a dribble it is
to get a layup, shorten a pass, or provide balance to the floor
● Encourage open uncontested jump shots
● Ball reversals = open driving lanes.
● If players are not open on a cut they need to get out with urgency. Keep the
lane open for cutters and drivers
4v0
● All cuts are in play. After a player finishes
cutting in the rim. Exit Cut to the Corner
that’s open.
● Players should fill spots toward where
the ball is passed, opening a spot for
cutters to exit.
4v4
Use 4v0 spots to play 4v4
● Cut to get open. Cut to score.
○ Players should always look at Face
Cut first.
● Backdoor if overplayed and Fill Cut from
the next spot.
○ Players will want to start a back cut and pop out to the spot they came
from. Discourage this. If you start a back cut you have to finish it. Do
NOT dance.
● No dribbles.
○ If a player catches a cut and needs a dribble to get to the rim for a
layup, allow the dribble.
● Add any amount of dribbles you think is necessary. 2 or 3 dribbles are
recommended as long as straight line drives are emphasized and useless
dribbles are eliminated. Coach can blow a possession dead for using dribbles
ineffectively.
5v0 - 5v5 No Post
5v0
Dribble handoffs occur when the ball handler dribbles at a teammate and not
before. If a player receives a handoff they should be looking to score. Maintain
spacing! Pass and cut! Emphasize Sprint Cuts!
5v5 Live
Playing to score. 3 dribble limit handoffs are now available to players. Still
emphasizing all of the spacing and cutting concepts covered to this point.
5v0 - 5v5 Temporary Post
Rules for a temporary post:
● Finish cut to the rim.
● Post under the rim
momentarily for a potential no
dribble / no post move needed
finish.
● Move out to the first hash
● Post hard and call for the ball
● Pop out after one pass is
made.
Tips for a Post-Up:
● Get low
● Get wide
● Call for the ball
● Make contact with the defender
When a player is cutting they have an option to temporarily post by straddling the
first hash before getting out. The first hash is essential because if a player posts on
the block it is difficult to utilize the baseline side to score out of the post. Elevating
the catch to the first hash allows a post move to go toward the middle and baseline
leaving more options at the post player's disposal.
After a post entry players can Laker Cut. Be patient in the post and players need to
look in as well. Patience on both sides.
5v5 - No jump shots until 2 temporary posts have occurred
Chapter Six: Penetrate and Pitch
Driving the ball to the basket should try to accomplish one of two things.
1. Get a layup for the ball handler
2. Draw help and find a teammate that has a better opportunity to score.
It is important for a player without the ball to relocate to a position on the court
where it will be easy for the ball handler to deliver a pass on time and on target
along with being in a spot where it will be difficult for his/her defender to recover.
It is equally important that when receiving a pass, the player needs to be shot
ready.
Being Shot Ready
● Hips down (quarter squat)
● Show hands to the passer
● Catch the ball while feet are in the air.
● Land ready to shoot.
2v0
● Being great at Penetrate and Pitch will
create long closeouts allowing players to
either get open shots or blow-by drives
to the basket. It is important for the
receiver to use “ball in the air feet in the
air” footwork. Be ready to shoot on the
catch.
● The ball handler must be explosive
toward the rim to either get a layup for
themselves or attract multiple defenders to deliver a pass. Passes must be
delivered on time and on target so the receiver has the opportunity to shoot
an in rhythm shot. The ball handler must also protect the ball, move to the
right dribble with the right hand. Stay low on the drive.
● Wing drift to the corner - the ball handler
is able to get between X1 and X3 creating
an open passing lane
● Straight line drive to initiate drill.
● Ball handler stops momentum on drive to
avoid a charge.
● Wing circle behind - When the wing defender gets sucked in on the drive.
● Baseline Drive Drift - When the ball
handler is putting pressure on the rim
baseline side they need a passing option if
the layup is unavailable.
2v2
● Stay on one side.
● Make x2 commit to the ball before passing to a teammate.
● Defense is live on the dribble.
3v3
● Make a defender commit to the ball before
making a pass.
Chapter Seven: Dribble Hand-Off
● If Defender is tight - backdoor
● If defender is sagging - handoff and get
downhill (2 feet in the paint)
● Ball handler must dribble inside the 3
point line.
Back-door
● When going back door, make sure the
cutter shows their hand ONLY only on
the cut toward the hoop
● Passer can make a pass fake as well
before hitting cutter backdoor
Fake Hand-Off
● Make sure players are getting the same
depth that they would if they were doing
the normal handoff
2v2 Hand-Offs
1. Same set up. Both groups can go at the
same time or stagger them if you need
to.
2. Try to turn the corner on every handoff.
3. Back dribble to reset.
4. Back doors and fake handoffs are
available.
3v3
1. 3 dribble max
2. No jump shots until at least 2 dribble handoffs.
3. Only open uncontested shots allowed
4. Layups are always allowed whenever you can get them
Chapter Eight: 5v5
Put everything together to this point and play 5v5 with limited dribbles.
25 Point Game
1. Reversal = 3 points
2. OReb. = 2 Points
3. Pass = 1 Point
4. Basket = 2 Points
5. TO = -2 Points
Defense gets the ball after a stop or a turnover. First to 25 points wins.
Feel free to adjust scoring to impact your team goals. Think about what your team
strengths and weaknesses are. Are you a team who does not crash the offense
boards? Make Offensive Rebounds worth 4. Are you a team who turns the ball
over? Make TOs worth 4 and deflections worth 1 or 2 points.
Remember, the more competitive reps you give your players the better prepared
they will be on gameday. Hold your players accountable!
Chapter Nine: Cutters
Points of emphasis in 5v0 Cutters
1. Passing to the outside hand - On the perimeter the safest place to throw
the ball is to the outside hand or the outside shoulder of the player receiving
the pass.
2. Cutting hard to the basket showing inside hand.
3. Going backdoor if overplayed or opportunity presents itself.
4. Attacking off the dribble - Constant passing and cutting should open
decent sized gaps for a ball handler to take their defender off the dribble
with a higher probability to have a chance at a layup.
5. Facing up to the hoop - Every time a player catches the ball they need to be
able to see teammates come open on cuts or open lanes to drive.
Cut and Fill
Unbalanced Floor
There are a number of situations that can arise
that could lead to an unbalanced floor. All of
these situations are okay! The only way to mess
the offense up is by attempting to fix it. Commit
to cuts and continue to play.
● In this situation 4 and 5 can go to the
empty side of course, but if they go to
the side fully occupied then the ball
handler just has a great opportunity to
drive right handed with no help on that
side. 3 and 1 can fill behind creating
space for 4 and 5 to occupy.
● If however, 4 and 5 start to Exit cut, and 4
changes their mind to go to the opposite
side because he or she thinks they made
a mistake. It can lead to congestion at
the rim not allowing the ball handler to
get to the basket and no option to pass
to the player’s man who is helping.
Chapter Ten: Away Screens
It is recommended that if you decide to implement away screens, require them to
curl every time. This will allow the kids to play hard and quickly without worrying
about having to make reads right away.
Screener - the emphasis of the screener should be:
1. Take 1-2 steps toward the basket - This will set up the screener to be in a
tougher position to apply help. This will also allow the screener to get a good
angle on the screen.
2. Sprint into screen
3. Plant feet
4. Get wide
5. Communicate screen
*Setting great screens often open up the screener for a shot opportunity*
Player Coming Off Screen - The emphasis of the player coming off
the screen should be:
1. Setup his/her defender by getting to level of the screen
2. Come off screen shoulder to hip
3. Cut to basket.
4. Give target hand(s)
● Start 4v0 continuous described below and move to 4v4 when they become
ready.

Chapter Eleven: Ball Screens
Emphasis For Screener
1. Take a step or 2 toward the basket - This will set up the defender and
improve the screening angle.
2. Sprint to screen - Screeners goal should be to arrive alone or his/her
defender late to the screening action.
3. Butt down feet wide
4. Make sure you are set
5. Roll or run to basket
Emphasis For Ball Handler
1. Come off shoulder to hip
2. Get to nail or middle of the paint
3. Attack hard
4v0 and 4v4 options - Pass to wing and cut, set an Away screen, hand-off, or ball
screen.
When playing, as a coach try to remind them about ways to keep the floor balanced
and the options they have while playing.